[ENDOC-688] Add "Domain Driven Architectures: Building business based autonomous components" blog (#702)
entando/entando-docs: vuepress/docs/_posts/2023-03-17-building-business-based-autonomous-components.md

 

Composable apps and Hexagonal Architectures go hand-in-hand in achieving that goal and achieving . The goal of composable apps is to build applications as a set of loosely-coupled, independently deployable components that are combined to meet the needs of users. Hexagonal Architecture provides a framework for achieving this goal by organizing the application around its core business logic and making it agnostic to the surrounding technical infrastructure.

It would be a mistake to think any developer would naturally use one or both. First, because Composable apps are quite new in IT and then because, even though Hexagonal Architecture is getting more popular, there are many things to know to be Domain Centric.  

Combining both is a great choice and here we explain why.

In this blog, we will delve into the concepts of composable apps and domain-driven architecture, with a specific focus on Hexagonal Architecture. By the end of this blog, you will have a deep understanding of how Hexagonal Architecture can be leveraged to build applications that deliver fast business value for the users.

> # Business Splitting instead of Technical

Author: @jyunmitch any idea on how we can change it to a more explicit title?

However, having business facing code in a vacuum doesn't serve any purpose! We have to, somehow, make that code available to users and systems. We also need interactions with infrastructure elements (database, queues, …). Protecting the Domain Model while allowing those interactions is the main purpose of Domain Centric code Architecture.

# Architectures around Domain Model

There are many Domain Centric Software Architectures. If they all focus on the Domain Model protection, depending on your needs, one may be more suited than the other.

I’m mainly a Java developer. On the backend, my “default” Domain Centric architecture is a peculiar flavor of [Ports and Adapters](https://alistair.cockburn.us/hexagonal-architecture/) (aka Hexagonal Architecture).

In this flavor, of course I’ll start with the Domain Model at the center: 

![drawing](./images/2023-03-17-image1.png)

Most of the time, my goal will be to expose Domain operations through WebServices. This is the Primary Adapters job:

![drawing](./images/2023-03-17-image2.png)

> This is where the flavor specificity kicks in: The Application Layer. This is a very thin layer mainly composed by XXXApplicationService that are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is where the flavor specificity kicks in: the application layer. This is a very thin layer mainly composed of application services that do:
```

> * Wiring transactions management;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Wiring transactions management
```

> * Wiring authorization control;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Wiring authorization control
```

> * Doing really simple orchestration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Really simple orchestration
```

This Layer has Framework dependencies so it will be really easy to add the wiring capabilities.

> Since the Application Layer needs to interact with infrastructure we’ll need to add ports & adapters:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the application layer needs to interact with infrastructure we’ll need to add ports and adapters:
```

![drawing](./images/2023-03-17-image3.png)

The ports are interfaces in the domain and the secondary adapters are implementations of these ports.

> > Ports are in the Domain because it is really common to inject them in the domain, ex: in Domain Services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Ports are in the domain because it is really common to inject them, ex: in domain services.
```

I really like this architecture because each part is only doing one thing so we can focus on doing it well:

> * Primary adapters only need to make a great adaptation. For example, they can have great REST documentation without polluting anything else;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Primary adapters only need to make (description or precise adjectives) adaptation. For example, they can have great REST documentation without polluting anything else.
```

> * Application is really thin, no real Business value here;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The application is really thin, no real business value here
```

> * Domain is the code that really matters so we can focus on it’s correctness and expressivity;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The domain code is what really matters so we can focus on its accuracy and expression
```

> * Secondary adapters only need to make a great adaptation to infrastructure elements. For example, we can focus on having a really performant data model for our business cases here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Secondary adapters only need to make (what kind of) adaptation to infrastructure elements. For example, we can focus on having a really performant data model for our business cases here.
```

> This very quick introduction is probably not enough to be able to code in this kind of architecture. You can have a look at [this live coding](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mEECPRZjajI) to see it in action.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/mEECPRZjajI" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>

> If you are using OOP you should give it a try. If this doesn’t suit your needs you might want to have a look at [Onion Architecture](https://jeffreypalermo.com/2008/07/the-onion-architecture-part-1/) or [Functional Core Imperative Shell](https://kennethlange.com/functional-core-imperative-shell/) if your Domain Model is in FP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are using OOP you should give (be explicit about what) a try. If this doesn’t suit your needs you might want to have a look at [Onion Architecture](https://jeffreypalermo.com/2008/07/the-onion-architecture-part-1/) or [Functional Core Imperative Shell](https://kennethlange.com/functional-core-imperative-shell/) if your domain model is in FP.
```

Author: @jyunmitch the "it" here refers to the hexagonal architecture in the sense that, if you are using OOP, try to implement the hexagonal architecture because it worth it.

> But, to be honest, this doesn’t really matter. Having a rich Domain Model (opposed to an [anemic one](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/AnemicDomainModel.html)) is the important part! You can then protect this domain with the architecture you like as long as it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But, to be honest, this doesn’t really matter. Having a rich domain model (opposed to an [anemic one](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/AnemicDomainModel.html)) is the important part! You can then protect this domain with the architecture you like as long as it:
```

> * Exposes operations on your domain model without polluting it;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Exposes operations on your domain model without polluting it
```

> * Allows interaction with infrastructure without impacting your Domain Model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Allows interaction with infrastructure without impacting your domain model
```

> In an application, you can have different architecture from one Bounded Context to the other. Ah, yes, there won’t be one Domain Model, there will be many of them, one for each Bounded Context!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In an application, you can have different architecture from one bounded context to the other. Ah, yes, there won’t be one domain model, there will be many of them, one for each bounded context!
```

# Bounded Context?

A Bounded Context is an autonomous piece of code responsible for a part of the Domain logic. Autonomous doesn't mean they can’t communicate with each other!

> > If you want to dig into the communication between Bounded Contexts you are probably looking for [Context Mapping](https://github.com/ddd-crew/context-mapping) but it is not part of this article.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> If you want to dig into the communication between bounded contexts you are probably looking for [Context Mapping](https://github.com/ddd-crew/context-mapping) but it is not part of this article.
```

> So, Bounded Contexts are Bounded… That means they can have different life cycles, be managed by different teams as long as Team Topology sticks to Code Organization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, bounded contexts are bounded… That means they can have different life cycles and be managed by different teams as long as your Team Topology sticks to code organization.
```

> If you want to check how to organize Teams around that you want to apply an inverse [Conway](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conway%27s_law) maneuver. [Team Topologies](https://teamtopologies.com/) will help in that regard but, again, not part of this article.

Bounded Contexts are the parts we are looking for when trying to split a solution. Problem is: they are not really easy to find…

The first element to look at when trying to find Bounded Contexts is language. If you are using totally different words or the same word with a different meaning that probably means you are in different Bounded Contexts.

> Back to our survey application. To send surveys we have templates with questions. The template notion also exists when sending emails to users. Same word, totally different meanings! This was an easy one, a trickier one is templates in the template context and templates in the questionnaire context. In the template context they are models that can be used to create a new campaign. In the questionnaire one they are the customized ones just existing in a campaign. Same word, same idea, totally different usages and users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Back to our survey application. To send surveys we have templates with questions. The template notion also exists when sending emails to users. Same word, totally different meanings! This was an easy one. A trickier one is templates in the template context and templates in the questionnaire context. In the template context they are models that can be used to create a new campaign. In the questionnaire context they are the customized models just existing in a campaign. Same word, same idea, totally different usages and users.
```

> There are a lot of hints, apart from language, to find Bounded Context but I think that the best call is not to try too hard, at first. For me, the best way to find Bounded Contexts is to let them appear in code, as we get deeper insights of the problem we are trying to solve.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are a lot of hints, apart from language, to find bounded contexts, but I think that the best call is to not try too hard at first. For me, the best way to find bounded contexts is to let them appear in the code as we get deeper insights into the problem we are trying to solve.
```

> This approach is called [MonolithFirst](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/MonolithFirst.html) and the plan is to start with all the code in the same place and extract some parts, little by little. When boundaries are not moving that much we can start splitting the Monolith (if needed).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach is called [MonolithFirst](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/MonolithFirst.html) and the plan is to start with all the code in the same place and extract some parts, little by little. When boundaries are not moving that much we can start splitting the monolith (if needed).
```

But, this can only work if our code is welcoming changes, and this is probably the key to splitting applications!

> # PBCs and Composable Apps are Domain Centric approaches

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# PBCs and Composable Apps are Domain-Centric Approaches
```

This is similar to the concept of "ports" in Hexagonal Architecture, where the business logic is isolated and treated as a central component that can be connected to different interfaces (such as user interfaces, databases, or other services) without affecting its core functionality.

By leveraging the principles of Hexagonal Architecture, PBCs can be developed in a way that is decoupled from the underlying technology, making it easier to make changes to the technology stack without affecting the business capabilities. By following this architectural pattern, PBCs can be designed and developed in a way that is flexible, scalable, and easy to understand, making them a powerful tool for delivering business value.

Understanding the Bounded Contexts helps to design the PBCs you need to use or to develop. It is funny to see that both Hexagonal Architecture and PBCs are symbolized by a hexagonal shape, as they are both centered around the core business logic while they are concepts that are applied at different levels.

> On the other side, Composable Apps benefit PBCs structure by using them as bricks of business logic, making them independently composed and communicating using interfaces, and business-oriented contracts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the other hand, PBC structure benefits from composable apps, which are used as bricks of business logic - independently composable, using interfaces to communicate, and offering business-oriented contracts.
```

Hexagonal Architecture or Composable Apps are following the same concepts but at a different level of abstraction using Domain Models as warrantors of the business core concepts.

> Does that mean Domain Centric Architecture is mandatory to use to build PBCs? Of course not, they both play at different stages of your application lifecycle. But, if you find Composable Apps useful to use to design your business application, there is no reason not to study these architectures to design your business code too. And, if you already use domain-centric practices to build your apps, using Composable Apps could be a good move to streamline these practices on the different layers of your business implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Does that mean domain-centric architecture is mandatory to use to build PBCs? Of course not. They come into play at different stages of your application lifecycle. But, if you find composable apps useful for designing your business application, there is no reason not to study these architectures to design your business code, too. And, if you already use domain-centric practices to build your apps, using composable apps could be a good move to streamline these practices for the different layers of your business implementation.
```

> Back to our survey application, Bob can definitely help us understand the business context, that helps to code PBCs using a domain-centric architecture and to design the Composable Apps from a pack of these PBCs. Thanks to Bob, we would be able to share that knowledge through business components, share them with the company dev teams and let them reuse them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Back to our survey application. Bob can definitely help us understand the business context, which helps to code PBCs using a domain-centric architecture and to design composable apps from a set of these PBCs. Thanks to Bob, we would be able to share that knowledge, through business components, with the company dev teams and let them reuse them.
```

# Built for change

Let’s admit it: we need experimentation to build great products. It is not possible to get it right on the first try (neither from a functional nor a technical perspective). So… if we have to make important changes many times, we have to build code that will welcome those changes!

> Types and Tests provides a pretty decent safety net to ensure that the solution is still working “as intended.” As we gain knowledge, the intent will change. New concepts will emerge, others will disappear. Code has to keep expressing that.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Types and Tests provide a pretty decent safety net to ensure that the solution is still working “as intended.” As we gain knowledge, the intent will change. New concepts will emerge, others will disappear. Code has to keep expressing that.
```

With code built around a Domain Model, with really clear adaptations for the infrastructure parts, it is totally possible to refactor the whole thing without breaking anything! It is also possible to clearly extract a Bounded Context just by putting in a module (package in java, namespace in C#, …).

> Moving Bounded Contexts in modules and letting them live there for a while is a good plan since it’s way easier to do (or undo) than building a dedicated binary with its infrastructure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moving bounded contexts into modules and letting them live there for a while is a good plan since it’s way easier to do (or undo) than building a dedicated binary with its infrastructure.
```
